W-19785676-FIPS-140-3-dm (#3173)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/fips-140-3-compliance-support.adoc

= FIPS 140-3 Compliance Support
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: fips, certifications, security, fips-140-3

> Run Mule 4 in a Fedesarl Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-3 certified environment by enabling approved cryptography providers and runtime settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run Mule 4 in a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-3 certified environment by enabling approved cryptography providers and runtime settings.
```

Use this guide to install BC-FJA, enable FIPS mode, and configure TLS and keystore formats for compliant deployments.
These steps help you meet federal cryptography requirements while keeping runtime behavior predictable across environments.

> Mule doesn't run in FIPS security mode by default. To enable it, you must:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mule doesn't run in FIPS security mode by default.  To use FIPS security mode:
```

* Install a certified cryptography module in your Java environment.
* Adjust Mule runtime settings to run in FIPS security mode.

== Compatibility

FIPS 140-3 support requires:

> * Mule 4.10 or later (for earlier versions of Mule runtime, use xref:fips-140-2-compliance-support.adoc[FIPS 140-2 Compliance Support])

Author: ```suggestion
* Mule 4.11 or later (for earlier versions of Mule runtime, use xref:fips-140-2-compliance-support.adoc[FIPS 140-2 Compliance Support])
```

> * Mule 4.11 or later (for earlier versions of Mule runtime, use xref:fips-140-2-compliance-support.adoc[FIPS 140-2 Compliance Support])

Author: ```suggestion
* Mule 4.11.4 or later (for earlier versions of Mule runtime, use xref:fips-140-2-compliance-support.adoc[FIPS 140-2 Compliance Support])
```

+
----
ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
ssl.TrustManagerFactory.algorithm=PKIX
----

== Running Mule in FIPS Security Mode

After installing the BC-FJA provider, configure Mule to run in FIPS 140-3 mode:

. Open your `wrapper.conf` file (located in `${MULE_HOME}/conf`).
. Add these properties. Replace `<n>` with the next sequential number in your file:
+
----
# Enable FIPS 140-3 security mode
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.security.model=fips140-3

# Enable Bouncy Castle approved-only mode
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dorg.bouncycastle.fips.approved_only=true

# Required for Java 17+ module access
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=--add-opens=java.base/sun.security.provider=org.bouncycastle.fips.core

# Set keystore type to BCFKS
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.keystore.type=BCFKS
----
+
. If you're using a clustered environment, also add the cluster encryption key:
+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Dmule.cluster.network.encryption.key={your-encryption-key}
----
+
For more information about clustering in FIPS mode, see xref:mule-high-availability-ha-clusters.adoc#cluster_fips[Cluster reference].
+
. Save your changes and start Mule runtime.

[IMPORTANT]
--

> In FIPS-compliant environments, all keystores and truststores typically require BCFKS format. However, you may need to support legacy JKS stores, such as the default Java truststore at `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts`. See <<FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats>> for configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In FIPS-compliant environments, all keystores and truststores typically require BCFKS format. To support legacy JKS stores, such as the default Java truststore at `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts`, see <<FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats>> for configuration options.
```

[IMPORTANT]
--
Not all connectors are FIPS 140-3 compliant. Only connectors tagged as `fips-140-3-verified` in Anypoint Exchange are certified to use in FIPS 140-3 environments. Always verify compliance in Exchange before deploying.
--

== FIPS 140-3 Compliant Cipher Suites

These cipher suites are enabled by default when running Mule in FIPS 140-3 mode.

=== TLS 1.3 Cipher Suites

* TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_AES_128_CCM_SHA256
* TLS_AES_128_CCM_8_SHA256

=== TLS 1.2 Cipher Suites

* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
* TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA

[NOTE]
--
These cipher suites are configured in the `${MULE_HOME}/conf/tls-fips140-3.conf` file. FIPS 140-3 requires support for TLS 1.3 and TLS 1.2. Earlier TLS versions aren't supported.
--

== FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats

> Keystores or truststores in non-FIPS environments are typically formatted as `PKCS12` or `JKS`. Since these formats are not FIPS-compliant, they need to be converted to `BCFKS` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keystores or truststores in non-FIPS environments are typically formatted as `PKCS12` or `JKS`. These formats aren't FIPS-compliant. Convert them to `BCFKS` format.
```

+
----
BC_FIPS_JAR=${MULE_HOME}/lib/boot/bc-fips-2.1.2.jar  # Replace with a correct path
OLD_KEYSTORE="keystore.jks"                          # Replace with the keystore to convert
OLD_PASSWD="changeit"                                # Replace with the keystore password
NEW_KEYSTORE="keystore.bcfks"                        # Replace with the new keystore
NEW_PASSWD="changeit"                                # Replace with the new keystore password

keytool -importkeystore \
 -providerclass sun.security.provider.Sun \
 -providerclass org.bouncycastle.jcajce.provider.BouncyCastleFipsProvider \
 -providerpath ${BC_FIPS_JAR} \
 -srckeystore  ${OLD_KEYSTORE}   -srcstoretype JKS       -srcstorepass ${OLD_PASSWD} \
 -destkeystore ${NEW_KEYSTORE}   -deststoretype BCFKS    -deststorepass ${NEW_PASSWD}
----
. Update the xref:tls-configuration.adoc[TLS configuration] in your Mule application to use the new keystore or truststore:
+
----
<tls:context>
	<tls:key-store   type="bcfks" path="server.bcfks" password="changeit" keyPassword="changeit" alias="default" />
	<tls:trust-store type="bcfks" path="client.bcfks" password="changeit" />
</tls:context>
----

> . A special case is the truststore of the JVM, which is a `JKS` store by default, located at `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts`. There are two approaches to handle this special case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. By default, the JVM truststore at `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts` is a  `JKS`. There are two approaches to handle this special case:
```

** Convert to BCFKS
*** Convert the `JKS` store to `BCFKS` using the `keytool` command as described in <<FIPS 140-3 Compliant Keystore Formats>>, pointing OLD_KEYSTORE to `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts` and NEW_KEYSTORE to `${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts.bcfks`

> *** Add the following properties to your `wrapper.conf` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*** Add these properties to your `wrapper.conf` file:
```

+
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Djavax.net.ssl.trustStore=${JAVA_HOME}/lib/security/cacerts.bcfks
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Djavax.net.ssl.trustStorePassword=changeit
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Djavax.net.ssl.trustStoreType=bcfks
----
** Allow legacy `JKS` store

> *** Add the following property to your `wrapper.conf` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*** Add this property to your `wrapper.conf` file:
```
